`v0.21.0` release notes (#2159)
PennyLaneAI/pennylane: doc/releases/changelog-0.21.0.md

  symbols = ["He", "H"]
  geometry = np.array([[0.0, 0.0, 0.0], [0.0, 0.0, 1.4588684632]])
  mol = qml.hf.Molecule(symbols, geometry, charge=1)

  # generate the qubit Hamiltonian
  H = qml.hf.generate_hamiltonian(mol)(geometry)

  # determine Hamiltonian symmetries
  generators, paulix_ops = qml.hf.generate_symmetries(H, len(H.wires))
  opt_sector = qml.hf.optimal_sector(H, generators, mol.n_electrons)

  # taper the Hamiltonian
  H_tapered = qml.hf.transform_hamiltonian(H, generators, paulix_ops, opt_sector)
  ```

  We can compare the number of qubits required by the original Hamiltonian
  and the tapered Hamiltonian:

  ```pycon
  >>> len(H.wires)
  4
  >>> len(H_tapered.wires)
  2
  ```

  For quantum chemistry algorithms, the Hartree-Fock state can also be tapered:

  ```python
  n_elec = mol.n_electrons
  n_qubits = mol.n_orbitals * 2

  hf_tapered = qml.hf.transform_hf(
      generators, paulix_ops, opt_sector, n_elec, n_qubits
  )
  ```
  ```pycon
  >>> hf_tapered
  tensor([1, 1], requires_grad=True)
  ```

<h4>New tensor network templates 🪢</h4>

* Quantum circuits with the shape
  of a matrix product state tensor network can now be easily implemented

>   using the new `qml.MPS` template.
>   Motivation and theory can be found in [arXiv:1803.11537](https://arxiv.org/abs/1803.11537).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  using the new `qml.MPS` template, based on the work [arXiv:1803.11537](https://arxiv.org/abs/1803.11537).
```

  [(#1871)](https://github.com/PennyLaneAI/pennylane/pull/1871)

>   An example circuit that uses the `MPS` template is:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

I think this is implied :)

<h3>New features since last release</h3>

> <h4>Tapering off qubits</h4>

Author: How about
* Reduce the qubit requirements of simulating Hamiltonians ⚛️

?

> <h4>Tapering off qubits</h4>

Reviewer: nice!

> * Functions for tapering qubits based on molecular symmetries have been added.

Author: Sure, linked!

  [(#1966)](https://github.com/PennyLaneAI/pennylane/pull/1966)
  [(#1974)](https://github.com/PennyLaneAI/pennylane/pull/1974)
  [(#2041)](https://github.com/PennyLaneAI/pennylane/pull/2041)
  [(#2042)](https://github.com/PennyLaneAI/pennylane/pull/2042)

  With this functionality, a molecular Hamiltonian and the corresponding Hartree-Fock (HF) state can be transformed to a new Hamiltonian and HF state that acts on a reduced number of qubits, respectively.

  ```python
  from pennylane import hf
  from pennylane import numpy as np

  symbols = ["He", "H"]
  geometry = np.array([[0.0, 0.0, 0.0], [0.0, 0.0, 1.4588684632]])
  mol = hf.Molecule(symbols, geometry, charge=1)
  H = hf.generate_hamiltonian(mol)(geometry)
  n_qubits, n_elec = len(H.wires), mol.n_electrons

  generators, paulix_ops = hf.generate_symmetries(H, n_qubits)

>   paulix_sector = [1, -1, -1]

Author: It is used in
```python
  hf_tapered = hf.transform_hf(generators, paulix_ops, paulix_sector,
                                    n_elec, n_qubits)
```
as the 3. argument being passed.

>   paulix_sector = [1, -1, -1]

Reviewer: Ah I see now!

  opt_sector = hf.optimal_sector(H, generators, n_elec)
  H_tapered = hf.transform_hamiltonian(H, generators, paulix_ops, opt_sector)
  hf_tapered = hf.transform_hf(generators, paulix_ops, paulix_sector,
                                    n_elec, n_qubits)
  ```
  ```pycon
  >>> print(H_tapered)
    ((-1.7997297644914574+0j)) [I0]
  + ((-0.10492941956079854+0j)) [X0]
  + ((0.10492941956079856+0j)) [X1]
  + ((0.5675134088336165+0j)) [Z1]
  + ((0.5675134088336168+0j)) [Z0]
  + ((-0.14563730440190722+0j)) [Y0 Y1]
  + ((-0.10492941933657857+0j)) [X0 Z1]
  + ((0.09337410512815508+0j)) [Z0 Z1]
  + ((0.10492941933657857+0j)) [Z0 X1]
  >>> hf_tapered
  tensor([1, 1], requires_grad=True)

>   ```

Author: Thanks!

>   ```

Reviewer 2: The code is correct! I just suggest replacing the last block with the following:

```
```python
n_elec = mol.n_electrons
n_qubits = mol.n_orbitals * 2

hf_tapered = qml.hf.transform_hf(
    generators, paulix_ops, opt_sector, n_elec, n_qubits
)
```
```
And then the `paulix_sector = [1, -1, -1]` must be deleted.

>   ```

Author: Thank you! Applied.

>   ```

Reviewer 2: Double-checked the new push. All is good. Thanks @antalszava.

<h4>New tensor network templates</h4>

* A tensor network templates module has been added. Quantum circuits with the shape
  of a matrix product state tensor network can now be easily implemented.
  Motivation and theory can be found in [arXiv:1803.11537](https://arxiv.org/abs/1803.11537).
  [(#1871)](https://github.com/PennyLaneAI/pennylane/pull/1871)

  An example circuit that uses the `MPS` template is:
  ```python
  import pennylane as qml
  import numpy as np

  def block(weights, wires):
      qml.CNOT(wires=[wires[0],wires[1]])
      qml.RY(weights[0], wires=wires[0])
      qml.RY(weights[1], wires=wires[1])

  n_wires = 4
  n_block_wires = 2
  n_params_block = 2

>   template_weights = [[0.1,-0.3],[0.4,0.2],[-0.15,0.5]]

Author: @josh146 how come we'd like to make these inputs trainable? Is it because they are "weights"?

>   template_weights = [[0.1,-0.3],[0.4,0.2],[-0.15,0.5]]

Reviewer: yep! I worry someone will copy the example, and maybe then try to optimize it. With our latest `requires_grad` change, I'm not 100% sure this will work?

>   template_weights = [[0.1,-0.3],[0.4,0.2],[-0.15,0.5]]

Author: Yep, makes sense. I've changed it.

  dev= qml.device('default.qubit',wires=range(n_wires))
  @qml.qnode(dev)
  def circuit(weights):

>       qml.MPS(range(n_wires),n_block_wires,block, n_params_block, weights)

Author: > Might be best to eliminate the variable definitions above, and just have?

Frankly, I'd agree with the original version. Personally, I prefer when we first introduce objects and then use them. Having them in the call to me would make too many steps at the same time (the reader has to understand what we're creating, where we're passing the objects and why we do it). Having said that, I can change it, if we'd prefer to have the briefer version.

>       qml.MPS(range(n_wires),n_block_wires,block, n_params_block, weights)

Reviewer: Feel free to make the call @antalszava :)

>       qml.MPS(range(n_wires),n_block_wires,block, n_params_block, weights)

Author: Sure :) I might leave it as is then.

  2: ────────────────╰X──RY(0.2)──╭C──RY(-0.15)──┤
  3: ─────────────────────────────╰X──RY(0.5)────┤ ⟨Z⟩
  ```

* Added a template for tree tensor networks (TTN).
  [(#2043)](https://github.com/PennyLaneAI/pennylane/pull/2043)
  An example circuit that uses the `TTN` template is:
  ```python
  import pennylane as qml
  import numpy as np

  def block(weights, wires):
      qml.CNOT(wires=[wires[0],wires[1]])
      qml.RY(weights[0], wires=wires[0])
      qml.RY(weights[1], wires=wires[1])

  n_wires = 4
  n_block_wires = 2
  n_params_block = 2
  n_blocks = qml.MPS.get_n_blocks(range(n_wires),n_block_wires)
  template_weights = [[0.1,-0.3]]*n_blocks

  dev= qml.device('default.qubit',wires=range(n_wires))
  @qml.qnode(dev)
  def circuit(template_weights):
      qml.TTN(range(n_wires), n_block_wires, block, n_params_block, template_weights)
      return qml.expval(qml.PauliZ(wires=n_wires-1))
  ```
  The resulting circuit is:
  ```pycon
  >>> print(qml.draw(circuit,expansion_strategy='device')(template_weights))
  0: ──╭C──RY(0.1)─────────────────┤
  1: ──╰X──RY(-0.3)──╭C──RY(0.1)───┤
  2: ──╭C──RY(0.1)───│─────────────┤
  3: ──╰X──RY(-0.3)──╰X──RY(-0.3)──┤ ⟨Z⟩
  ```

> <h4>More powerful JAX interface</h4>

Reviewer: How about 'Improved JAX support'? The term 'interface' I think is a bit of jargon for someone casually reading the changelog :)

Author: Sg, thanks!

  2: ────────────────╰X──RY(0.2)──╭C──RY(-0.15)──┤
  3: ─────────────────────────────╰X──RY(0.5)────┤ ⟨Z⟩
  ```

* Added a template for tree tensor networks, `qml.TTN`.
  [(#2043)](https://github.com/PennyLaneAI/pennylane/pull/2043)

>   An example circuit that uses the `TTN` template is:
>   ```python

Reviewer: ```suggestion

  ```python
```

   DeviceArray([ 0.26043, -0.26043], dtype=float32, weak_type=True))
  ```

>   Note that `jax.jit` is not supported for vector-valued QNodes.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  Note that `jax.jit` is not yet supported for vector-valued QNodes.
```

Reviewer: 😉

> <h4>Generalized RotosolveOptmizer</h4>

Reviewer: Might be good to move this one up, I imagine it is something that is quite common to a lot of workflows in PL - if you are optimizing a variational circuit, this will interest you!

Author: Sure! Moved to 3. spot.

* The `RotosolveOptimizer` has been generalized to arbitrary frequency spectra
  in the cost function. Also note the changes in behaviour listed under *Breaking
  changes*.
  [(#2081)](https://github.com/PennyLaneAI/pennylane/pull/2081)

  Previously, the `RotosolveOptimizer` was available for cost functions with
  frequency spectra that only contained integers, and the maximal frequency
  (instead of the number of frequencies) determined the cost of the optimization.

>   Now arbitrary frequencies are supported.

Reviewer: I think this will need to be re-written, because on reading it now, I realize it won't be clear to a casual reader _what_ the improvement actually is (that is, what can you do with Rotosolve that you couldn't do before?).

@antalszava I'm curious, did you have trouble understanding the impact from the changelog entry?

I wonder if we can rewrite this to remove mentions of frequencies in the first paragraph (fine to mention it further down), but instead emphasize what you can now do with Rotosolve that you couldn't do before. E.g.,

- "Previously, the `RotosolveOptimizer` was available for cost functions with frequency spectra that only contained integers" --> "Previously, the `RotosolveOptimizer` only supported variational circuits with single-qubit Pauli rotations".

- "Now arbitrary frequencies are supported." --> "Now, circuits with arbitrary gates are supported natively without decomposition, as long as the frequencies of the gate parameters are known."

- "the maximal frequency (instead of the number of frequencies) determined the cost of the optimization." --> "This new generalization extends the Rotosolve optimization method to a larger class of circuits, and can reduce the cost of the optimization compared to decomposing all gates to single-qubit rotations."

Reviewer: @dwierichs, tagging you here in case you have any thoughts/in case I have said anything wrong above :)

Author: > @antalszava I'm curious, did you have trouble understanding the impact from the changelog entry?

I believe so, yes :smile: Frankly, I would have had to dive a bit deeper in there to grasp the concrete change. I recalled the restriction with `RotosolveOptimizer`, the suggestions make it clear from a usability point of view.

> Previously, the RotosolveOptimizer only supported variational circuits with single-qubit Pauli rotations

I do wonder about this. If I recall correctly, the constraint was as follows (from the Rotosolve paper):

![Screenshot from 2022-02-04 11-36-36](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/24476053/152567422-8b456a78-41aa-4c10-9150-1e76f893fc97.png)
 
As such, single-qubit Pauli rotations satisfy this requirement, but may not be the only ones that do so (not truly sure if there are other practical cases really in the qubit model. :sweat_smile:). So I'm wondering if we'd like to update it to "Previously, the RotosolveOptimizer only supported variational circuits using special gates such as single-qubit Pauli rotations".

Applying these suggestions and can update them as we'd like. :)

Reviewer: You are right, I was oversimplifying it!

Reviewer 3: My five cents:

> As such, single-qubit Pauli rotations satisfy this requirement, but may not be the only ones that do so

Indeed, any (i.e also multi-qubit) Pauli rotations are included in the original Rotosolve scope, because multi-qubit Pauli words also only have two distinct eigenvalues.
I suppose the question here also is to which version we are comparing? The original Rotosolve had the above restriction, the intermediate generalization also allowed other gates as long as the frequencies were integer-valued (including gates like `CRX` or `SingleExcitation` etc), and the full generalization released in 0.21 also includes more fancy gates like QAOA cost layers of non-integer-valued Hamiltonians and such.

The rest of the discussion here looks spot-on to me :)

  and not of the original objective function. For noisy cost functions, these intermediate
  evaluations may differ significantly from evaluations of the original cost function.

> <h4>Adjoint metric tensor</h4>

Reviewer: ```suggestion
<h4>Speedier quantum natural gradient</h4>
```
Because I think more people are familiar with QNG than metric tensor :)

Reviewer: Alternatively, we could make this 
```suggestion
<h4>More efficient quantum gradient transforms ⚡</h4>
```
to also include the Hessian entry, what do you think? Not _fully_ accurate --- since the metric tensor is not a gradient --- but maybe 'close enough'?

Author: Yep, I was also contemplating about having these two together :thinking: I think that the separate headlines that were suggested could catch the attention of the users better. I'll apply those (unless we'd like to merge the two entries surely).

> * Added the adjoint method for the metric tensor.

Reviewer: We should always try and make the first sentence 

- explain what the feature is to those who haven't been tracking PL development
- provide info on how to access the new feature
- make readers _super excited_ to learn more.

I think we can improve this one 🙂 

How about something like this?

```suggestion
* A new function for computing the metric tensor on simulators,
  `qml.adjoint_metric_tensor`, has been added, that uses classically
  efficient methods to massively improve performance.
```

  [(#1992)](https://github.com/PennyLaneAI/pennylane/pull/1992)

>   This method, detailed in [Jones 2020](https://arxiv.org/abs/2011.02991),

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  This method, detailed in [Jones (2020)](https://arxiv.org/abs/2011.02991),
```
not often you see a single-author paper in the physics these days!

  computes the metric tensor using four copies of the state vector and
  a number of operations that scales quadratically in the number of trainable
  parameters.

  Note that as it makes use of state cloning, it is inherently classical
  and can only be used with statevector simulators and `shots=None`.

>   It is particularly useful for larger circuits for which backpropagation requires

Reviewer: good catch!

Author: Nathan got it :)

  The adjoint method requires memory for 4 independent state vectors, which corresponds roughly
  to storing a state vector of a system with 2 additional qubits.

> <h4>New parameter-shift Hessian function</h4>

Reviewer: if we decide to keep a separate subheading here, I would also suggest making it more descriptive, something like
```suggestion
<h4>Compute the Hessian on hardware</h4>
```

Author: Changed to have this.

> * A new function `qml.gradients.param_shift_hessian` has been added to directly compute the Hessian

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* A new gradient transform `qml.gradients.param_shift_hessian` has been added to directly compute the Hessian
```

>   (2nd order partial derivative matrix) of QNodes and QuantumTapes. The function generates

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  (2nd order partial derivative matrix) of QNodes on hardware. The function generates
```

Reviewer: let's also move the PR link here (after the full stop), and have a line break before the next paragraph :)

Author: Done thanks!

> <h3>Improvements</h3>

Reviewer: For the improvements section, I would move the following to the top:

- The insert transform now supports adding operation after or before certain specific gates. [(#1980)](https://github.com/PennyLaneAI/pennylane/pull/1980)

- Added a modified version of the simplify function to the hf module. [(#2103)](https://github.com/PennyLaneAI/pennylane/pull/2103)

- The QAOA module now accepts both NetworkX and RetworkX graphs as function inputs. [(#1791)](https://github.com/PennyLaneAI/pennylane/pull/1791)

Author: Thanks!

> * For subclasses of `Operator` where it is known before instantiation, the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* For subclasses of `Operator` where the number of parameters
  is known before instantiation, the
```

  to control the precision of parameters.
  [(#2071)](https://github.com/PennyLaneAI/pennylane/pull/2071)

> * `insert` transform now supports adding operation after or before certain specific gates.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* The `qml.transforms.insert` transform now supports adding operation after or before certain specific gates.
```

  [(#1980)](https://github.com/PennyLaneAI/pennylane/pull/1980)

* Interferometer now has a `shape` method.
  [(#1946)](https://github.com/PennyLaneAI/pennylane/pull/1946)

> * The `CircuitGraph`, used to represent circuits via directed acyclic graphs, now

Reviewer: @antalszava I can't comment on it, but the first entry in the Breaking Changes section says "See the previous entry for details.". I think it should be moved to the second entry!

Reviewer: For the breaking changes section, let's have the following order:

1. QNode arguments will no longer be considered trainable by default when using the Autograd interface. 

2. qml.jacobian now follows a different convention regarding its output shape. [(#2059)](https://github.com/PennyLaneAI/pennylane/pull/2059)

3. qml.metric_tensor, qml.adjoint_metric_tensor and qml.transforms.classical_jacobian now follow a different convention regarding their output shape when being used with the Autograd interface [(#2059)](https://github.com/PennyLaneAI/pennylane/pull/2059)

4. The behaviour of RotosolveOptimizer has been changed regarding its keyword arguments. [(#2081)](https://github.com/PennyLaneAI/pennylane/pull/2081)

Author: Changed, thanks!

  provided by the underlying device.
  [(#2111)](https://github.com/PennyLaneAI/pennylane/pull/2111)

> * Raises an error during QNode creation if backpropagation is requested on a device with

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* An error is now raised during QNode creation if backpropagation is requested on a device with
```
